---
title: Notes on Architecture
author: Antonio Gramsci
source: Notes on Architecture, Divisare, 2017
lang: en
template: post
---

<toc />

## New architecture. The special, objective character of architecture[^1]

> A spider conducts operations that resemble those of a weaver, and a bee puts to shame many an architect in the construction of her cells. But what distinguishes the worst architect from the best of bees is this, that the architect raises his structure in imagination before he erects it in reality.  
Karl Marx

THE "work of art" is really the "project" (the set of drawings, plans and calculations with which people other than the architect, the "artist-designer", can construct the building, etc.): an architect can be judged a great artist on the basis of his plans even without having actually built anything. The project is to the physical building as the "manuscript" is to the printed book: the building is the social manifestation of the art, its "diffusion", the opportunity afforded the public to participate in beauty (when there is any), just like the printed book. Tilgher's objection to Croce[^2] about "memory" as a cause of the artistic manifestation is therefore irrelevant: the architect does not need the building in order to "remember" but the plan. And this holds also when Croce's "memory" is considered only as a relative approximation in the problem of why painters paint, writers write, etc., and do not confine themselves to constructing phantasms for their sole use and consumption: and bearing in mind that every architectonic project is more of an "approximation" than a manuscript, painting, etc. The writer also makes changes for every edition of the book (or alters things while correcting the proofs, e.g. Manzoni). The situation is more complex in architecture because the building in itself is never [completely] finished but [must be modified] also in relation to the "panorama" into which it is inserted, etc. (nor can second editions be produced as easily as in the case of a book, etc.). The most important point to be noted today is, however, that great architectural art cannot be born in a quickly developing civilization, where the urban "panorama" must be very "elastic", because it is more difficult to think of buildings made for "eternity". In America it is estimated that a skyscraper must last no longer than 25 years, as it is assumed that the entire city "can" change its appearance, etc., in the space of 25 years. In my view, great architectural art can only be born after a transitory phase of "practical" character, i.e. one in which we seek only to achieve the maximum satisfaction of the people's elementary needs to the maximum advantage. This is to be understood in the broad sense, i.e. not as regards a single building, dwelling or place for great masses to gather but as regards an architectural complex with streets, squares, gardens, parks, etc.

[^1]: Quaderno 3, §155.
[^2]: "Perché l'artista scrive, o dipinge, o scolpisce, ecc.?", in L'Italia che scrive, February 1929, pp. 31–32.  
An article exemplifying the author's logical inconsistency and lack of moral seriousness. Tilgher frivolously makes fun of Croce's theory and then presents it as his own at the end of the article in a highly imaginative, fanciful form. He says that according to Croce, "the physical manifestation […] of the artistic phantasm has an essentially mnemonic purpose", etc. This argument requires examination. What does "memory" mean for Croce in this case? Is its value purely personal and individual or also collective! Are writers concerned only with themselves or led historically to think also of others, etc.

## Questions of names[^3]

IT is clear that in architecture "rational" simply means "modern". It is also clear that "rationalism" is nothing other than a way of expressing beauty in accordance with the taste of a certain period. It is understandable that this should have happened in architecture before the other arts, as architecture is "collective" in the sense not only of "use" but also of "judgment". It could be said that "rationalism" has always existed, i.e. that we have always endeavoured to achieve a certain aim in accordance with a certain taste and in accordance with technical knowledge of the strength and adaptability of the "material". Whether and to what extent the "rationalism" of architecture can spread to the other arts is a difficult question and one that that will be answered by the "critique of facts" (which is not to say that intellectual and aesthetic criticism, which paves the way for the critique of facts, is useless). What is certain is that architecture appears to be in itself, and by virtue of its [immediate] connections with the rest of life, the most "debatable" and amendable of the arts. A painting, book or statuette can be kept in a "personal" place for personal taste but not an architectural construction. It is also worth recalling indirectly (for what it is worth in this case) Tilgher's observation that the work of architecture cannot be considered in the same terms as other works of art as regards "cost", volume, etc. The destruction of a work of construction, i.e. making and remaking, trying and trying again, is not very suitable for architecture.

It is correct that the study of function, though necessary, is not sufficient for the creation of beauty. In any case, "function" itself gives rise to disagreement. In other words, the idea and the fact of function are also individual or give rise to individual interpretations. Nor can it be claimed that "decoration" is not "functional" and that "decoration" is to be understood in the broad sense as everything that is not strictly "functional" like mathematics. Meanwhile, "rationality" leads to "simplification", which is already a great deal. (It combats aesthetic preciosity, which is characterized precisely by the predominance of the externally decorative element over the "functional", albeit in the broad sense, i.e. the sense of a function encompassing the "aesthetic function".) That it is now admitted that "architecture is the interpretation of what is practical" is already a great deal. This could perhaps be said of all the arts, that they are a "certain interpretation of what is practical", as long as the term "practical" is in no way understood as "cheap, Jewish" (or insipidly bourgeois: it should be noted that in many languages "bourgeois" means only "dull, mediocre, self-interested", i.e. it has taken on the meaning once given to the term "Jewish"; these problems of language are in any case important because language = thought, a way of speaking indicates a way not only of thinking and feeling but also of expressing yourself, i.e. of making yourself heard and understood). While the questions of "rationalism" do not of course arise for the other arts in the same way as for architecture, the "model" of architecture is useful, given that it must be admitted a priori that beauty is always such and presents the same problems regardless of its particular form of expression. It could be said that this is a matter of "technique", but technique is no more than a term and the problem starts all over again in different words.

[^3]: Quaderno 14, §1–2.

## What corresponds in literature to architectural "rationalism"?[^4]

UNQUESTIONABLY literature "with a plan", i.e. "functional" literature with a predetermined social aim. It is odd that rationalism should be applauded and justified in architecture and not in the other arts. There must be some misunderstanding. Perhaps the idea that architecture alone has practical purposes? It certainly appears that way, as architecture constructs housing, but this is not really the point. It is a question of "necessity". It will be said that housing is more necessary than the other arts, meaning only that housing is necessary for everyone while the other arts are necessary only for intellectuals, for people of culture. The conclusion should be drawn that it is precisely the "practical" people who are seeking to make all the arts necessary for everyone, to make everyone an "artist". Once again, social coercion! There is so much nonsense said against coercion. No one stops to think that it is just a word! Coercion, purpose and planning are simply a testing ground for artists, nothing more. And testing for practical ends, i.e. in a field in which will and coercion are perfectly justified. It is not as though coercion were something that has not always existed! Is it perhaps not coercion because it is exercised unconsciously by the environment and individuals and not by a central force or centralized power? In the end, it is always a matter of "rationalism" against individual will. And so the question does not concern coercion but whether it is a matter of authentic rationalism, real functionality, or arbitrary action. That's all. Coercion is such only for those who do not accept it, not for those who accept it. If coercion develops in accordance with the development of the social forces, it is not coercion but the "manifestation" of cultural truth obtained by accelerated means. We can say of coercion what the religious say of divine determination: for the "willing" it is not determination but free will. In actual fact, the coercion in question is opposed because it is a battle against intellectuals and against certain intellectuals, the conservatives and traditionalists, who admit at most that change is making its way little by little, gradually. It is odd that rationalism should be contrasted in architecture with "decorativism", and that the latter should be described as "industrial art". It is odd but right. Any artistic manifestation aimed at satisfying the tastes of rich individual purchasers and, as they say, "embellishing" their lives should in fact always be called industrial. When art, especially in its collective forms, is aimed at the creation and improvement of a mass taste, it is not "industrial" but unselfish, i.e. art. It appears to me that the concept of rationalism in architecture, i.e. of "functionalism" is very rich in consequences for principles of cultural policy. It is no coincidence that it was born precisely in these times of "socialization" (in the vast sense) and action on the part of central powers to organize the masses against the remnants of individualism and aesthetics of individualism in cultural policy.

[^4]: Quaderno 14, §65.
