---
title: My Dismissal from the Bauhaus
author: Hannes Meyer
orig_date: 1930
source: Hannes Meyer Bauten, Projekte und Schriften / Buildings, projects and writings, 1965
date: 2020-10-22
lang: en
template: post
---

Sir,

At the same time as I received your letter dated August 1, 1930 containing my dismissal without notice as the Director of the Bauhaus, I saw in the Berlin papers that a servant girl had been dismissed by her employers without notice because she had dared to perform her duties without stockings, that is with bare legs. I am ready to side with her, for, when all is said, I also owe my dismissal to my habit of baring not my legs but my ideas. I would ask you as my erstwhile superior to allow me to indulge my peculiar habit in this letter. –

What has happened?

On April 4, 1927 I was appointed Bauhaus master of architecture at this University of Design by Professor Dr.-Ing. Walter Gropius, the founder of the Bauhaus at Dessau. On April 1, 1928 I took over his post as Director after it had been declined by Mies van der Rohe. Thus I became a stop-gap and the insignificant successor of a great predecessor.

Herr Oberbürgermeister! Allow me to introduce the Bauhaus and myself to readers of "Das Tagebuch". I am Swiss, 40 years of age, married, living apart from my family; 5 ft. 9 in. tall, hair flecked with grey, eyes greyish blue, nose, mouth and forehead are (according to my Swiss passport) "medium?", special characteristics: external none. Now the Bauhaus itself: as the "Bauhaus Dessau" it is an institution belonging to the City of Dessau with an annual grant of RM 133000.– and as a "University of Design" it is answerable to the government of Anhalt. The annual budget is RM 167 000.–. There are 171 students, including 41 foreigners, 13 full-time and 4 part-time teachers, and Paul Klee, L. Feininger and W. Kandinsky as artists with a world-wide reputation.

What did I find on my appointment? A Bauhaus whose reputation had vastly outrun its power of achievement and which was the object of unprecedented publicity. A "university of design" which made the shape of every tea-glass a problem in constructivist aesthetics. A "cathedral of socialism" in which a medieval cult was practised with the revolutionaries of pre-war art aided by a rising generation who were casting sly looks leftwards and yet hoped at the same time to be canonized one day in the same temple.

Every path to a school of design which would satisfy the normal needs of life was barred by inbred theories. The cube was given to children to play with and the bright young things of the Bauhaus to trifle with. The square was red. The circle was blue. The triangle was yellow. They sat and slept on furniture like coloured geometry. They lived in houses like coloured sculpture. What lay on the floor as carpets were the mental complexes of young girls. Everywhere art had a stranglehold on life. This resulted in the tragicomic situation in which I found myself: As Director of the Bauhaus I was fighting against the Bauhaus style.

I fought constructively under my motto: all life is a striving after oxygen + carbon + sugar + starch + protein. Therefore, all design must be anchored in this life. Building is a biological and not an aesthetic process. Building is not the embodiment of an individual passion but a collective action. Building is the social, psychological, technical and economic organization of the processes of life. Building is a demonstration of a philosophy of life and strongly held opinions are inseparable from strong work. I taught the students the connection between building and society, the path from formal intuition to scientific building research and the precedence of the people's needs over luxuries. I taught them to despise the multifariousness of idealist reality and together we strove to attain the sole reality that can be mastered – that of the measurable, visible and ponderable.

It became my aim to place design on a scientific basis and there were some fundamental changes in the curriculum of the institution. The constructional engineer joined forces with the industrial consultant. The new appointments to the Bauhaus staff indicated the course that had been set: the socialist architect L. Hilbersheimer, Berlin, the mathematician and photographer W. Peterhans, Berlin, the Norwegian architect and critical philosopher E.Heiberg. I wanted to guard against the danger of our activities becoming pseudo-scientific by steadily building up the courses given by visiting lecturers, and with the preposterous sum of RM 3000.– at my disposal, I engaged personalities like Dir. O. Neurath, Vienna, K. von Meyenburg, Basle, Dr. Dunker, Berlin, Dr. H. Riedel, Dresden, Dr.R. Carnap, Freiburg, Dr. W. Dubislav, Berlin, Dr. E. Feigl, Vienna, Stadtrat Dr.L. Schmincke, Neukélin, Count Dürkheim, Leipzig, Karel Teige, Prague, Dr. H. Prinzhorn, Frankfurt, etc. and then, as "light relief" Hermann Finsterlin, Hans Richter, Ernst Toller, Disga Werthoff, Piet Zwaart. – I remedied the proverbial collective neuroses of the Bauhaus (the result of a one-sided emphasis on brainwork) by introducing physical training: a "university without physical exercise" seemed to me an absurdity. The weekly time-table took into account the variability in the capacity of the students to learn and the focal point of the week was three eight-hour days of workshop work. It was decided that there should be an introduction to gestalt psychology in the winter of 1930/31 in conjunction with Professor Felix Krüger, Leipzig, and his circle, a basic course in sociology was prepared and I had plans in mind to remedy the omission of lectures in social economics from our curriculum. All of which shows how unsuited I was to be the subordinate business manager of the "aera gropii". I had views of my own and I put them forward as plainly as I could.

The external success of this two-year period of Bauhaus work is well known to you, Herr Oberbürgermeister. The annual production of about RM 128 000.– (1928) has been almost doubled. The number of students increased from 160 to 197 and we could control the intake only by fixing a limit to admissions. The international "Circle of Friends of the Bauhaus" increased its membership from 318 to over 500. In the last business year, RM 32000.– was paid out to students by way of wages and this enabled those who were less well off to study there. A Bauhaus travelling exhibition publicized our ideas in Basle, Breslau, Dessau, Essen, Mannheim and Zurich. As the Director of the Bauhaus I preached my lectures in Vienna, Breslau, Basle, Prague, Dessau, Nuremberg, Mannheim, Essen, Brünn, etc. Industrial firms came along with urgent requests, engaged Bauhaus students on their staffs, and concluded licence agreements for Bauhaus fabrics, lamps, standard furniture, and wallpapers. We were given important assignments to design exhibitions for the aircraft, chocolate and canned goods industries. Within a year 4000 dwelling units were hung with Bauhaus wallpapers. There was thus every prospect of our finances being improved in future in the only really sound way, namely through self-help. My private commission to build the Federal School of the "General Trade Unions Federation of Germany" at Bernau near Berlin indirectly engaged the efforts of Bauhaus students and sometimes the Bauhaus itself. There was a study group working on the general development plan for Dessau, one was engaged on four experimental houses while another erected 90 workers' flats: two groups began to supply new furniture adapted to the environment of the child consumer goods became the dominant theme and the last of the art students went to mix paints for the wallpapers.

Throughout this period of collaboration we were united in our concern at the threat of politics being brought into the Bauhaus. To you, Herr Oberbürgermeister, the threat seemed to come from within the Bauhaus; for me, it came from outside. I still remember that morning in March when Comrade Paulick, Duke of Anhalt and the German Socialist Party, entered my study unannounced to attempt his first encroachment on the autonomy of our university. How revealing was his soft baritone voice when he said that "the Oberbürgermeister was my superior in form, whereas he was my superior in fact". Because I am against the Bauhaus becoming involved in politics, I acted in my capacity as Director and dissolved the communist cell among the students of the Bauhaus. You informed the Government of Anhalt of this step. Thus, when in July 1930 a false report appeared in the local Dessau press in connection with a voluntary collection made by some Bauhaus students for the "International Workers' Aid" and stated that there was still alocal group of the German Communist Party in the Bauhaus Dessau, the Government of Anhalt very properly requested that this contradiction should be investigated. You were unable to give effect to this request, for the cultural reactionists had long ago arranged in secret for a lust murder to be committed during the Bauhaus vacation.

Herr Oberbürgermeister! On my return from the opening of the Bauhaus travelling exhibition in Zurich, I came to see you on July 29, 1930. There was great excitement in Dessau. The 90 workers' flats in the Dessau-Torten estate, the first project to be jointly designed by our building department, were ready for occupation. Thousands flocked to see them. Unqualified recognition in every newspaper. A 2/2-room flat with a kitchen, bathroom and amenities for RM 37.50 per month rent! At last an achievement in keeping with the role of the new Bauhaus. The job had been done under my guidance but was actually carried out by a group of young students. I stepped into your room with a feeling of relief. You referred to the investigation of Bauhaus affairs which the Anhalt Government was demanding as a result of the false report from the town authorities – and called for my immediate resignation. The reason: it was alleged I was bringing politics into the Bauhaus. A Marxist (you said) could never be the Director of the Bauhaus. Immediate cause of dismissal: a voluntary contribution as a private person to the International Workers' Aid Fund for helping the distressed families of miners on strike in the Mansfeld coalfield. It was no use my reiterating that I had never belonged to any political party. It was no use explaining that a "Bauhaus Dessau" group of the German Communist Party was an impossibility from the party organization point of view, no use my assuring you that my political activities were of a cultural and never a party character. You cut me short and interpreted my nervous smile as agreement.

And so I was liquidated from behind. Just when the Bauhaus was closed for the vacation and all my intimates in the Bauhaus were far away from home. The Bauhaus camarilla rejoiced. The local press of Dessau was overcome by a moral delirium. The Bauhaus condor Gropius swooped down from the Eiffel tower and pecked at my directorial body, and, reassured, W. Kandinsky stretched out on the Adriatic beach: It is finished.

Herr Oberbürgermeister! A hundred years ago my compatriot Lavater racked his brains in Dessau trying to penetrate the inscrutability of the Anhalt physiognomies. As an amateur botanist I will try to understand you, the democratic reed swaying in the party winds. In spite of the injustice you have done me, I believe that your personal honour is unimpugned. I can appreciate the unpleasant duties sometimes devolving upon you in your role as Lord Chamberlain of the Dessau Town Hall. "How embarrassing", sang the choir in Paul Hindemith's opera "Neues vom Tage" last winter at the Dessau theatre, when the lady lay there in her bath. "How embarrassing" that it should be you of all people who have to kill me, the guileless one, in the very midst of my work of building up the Bauhaus. How embarrassing, Herr Oberbürgermeister, how embarrassing!

Zoological gardens, museums and race courses are forms in which the municipal urge to count for something finds expression. Besides "Worlitz" and "Junkers" Dessau has acquired a Bauhaus. Instead of keeping exotic animals, it keeps those egregious men whom the world admires as great artists. It is one of my deepest convictions that art cannot be taught. The cloverfield of young Bauhaus painters, cultivated by the most extraordinary painter individualist, will lie fallow in our age when social upheaval and the collective shortage of vital necessities are at their greatest. Moreover, it is a crime to give young people who are to be designers in the society of tomorrow the stale pabulum of obsolete art theories as nourishment. This is the heart of the matter. You are flirting with your culturally bolshevist institution and at the same time you forbid the inmates to be Marxists. For the camarilla concealed behind you the Bauhaus is an object of political megalomania and professorial vanities and an aesthetic amusement joint. For us in the Bauhaus it is a place where life is given a new shape. Municipal politics wants you to provide resounding Bauhaus successes, a brilliant Bauhaus facade and a prestigious Bauhaus Director. We in the Bauhaus are more and more content with the anonymity of our collective work. We believed that increasing specialization in the Bauhaus was in tune with the times in which we live and the Director was a comrade among comrades. Your Bauhaus glitters outside, ours glows inwardly. – What is to be done? Do we give up or do we instil a new spirit? Are we to have an art school or a Bauhaus?

Herr Oberbürgermeister! Fame is the sum of all the misunderstandings attaching to a name. Let us hope that my dismissal without notice (this easily misunderstood official act) will add to your fame, at least in Dessau and the Free State of Anhalt. But beyond the Ascanian frontiers people will find your conduct incomprehensible, ungentlemanly and inhuman.

Herr Oberbürgermeister! It is now your intention to exorcise the spirit of Marxism from the Bauhaus I have so tainted. Morals, propriety, decency and order are to be ushered in again on the arm of the Muses. As my successor you have allowed Mies van der Rohe to be imposed upon you, on the advice of Gropius and not – as the articles prescribe – on the advice of the Bauhaus masters. My colleague, poor fellow, is no doubt expected to take his pick-axe and demolish my work in pious memory of the Moholyian past of the Bauhaus. This infamous Marxism is to be fought, I suppose, with every weapon and thus the very life shaken out of the unsullied Bauhaus. Down with Marxism! And for this purpose who should you have chosen but Mies van der Rohe who designed the memorial for Karl Liebknecht and Red Rosie! Herr Oberbuirgermeister, shall I (for the last time) express my sympathy?

Herr Oberbürgermeister, my erstwhile colleague, the dismissed servant girl (with the unclad shanks) says she doesn't understand the Bauhaus affair.

Herr Oberbürgermeister, once again I side with that girl. I can see through everything. I understand nothing.