---
title: Intellectual labour and capitalist development
author: Manfredo Tafuri
orig_date: 1970
source: Contropiano, 2, 1970
date: 2020-10-22
lang: en
template: post
---

The singular gap between development processes, the restructuring that they impose on the capitalist division of labor, and the intellectual mediations that result from those processes is not yet completely closed. So much so, that it can be said that at present the general configuration with which intellectual work is presented is lacking in unitary connotations. This follows, mainly, from the ever deeper change of all institutional roles in the face of the reality of development.

Intellectual work and development, therefore: two areas of intervention that for some time they have finished compensating each other as an ideology on the one hand, and structural reality, on the other hand. All the "tragic" of Kultur bourgeois, the anguish experienced in seeing expropriated that Kultur of each progressive function, in verifying the ineffectiveness of its to be in the world, in recognizing it as a utopia of naive reason, yes are overturned in an intellectual work as a positive utopia, such as dialectical development model: as "dialectical form" in one word, that, recognizing the inertia of negativity to the system, in *projects* integration in an attempt at global domination of the future.

It is the unproductiveness of intellectual work that culture *blames*. nineteenth-century feels weighed on himself, and that advanced ideologies *must* overcome. Turning ideology upside down into utopia then becomes a categorical imperative. To survive, ideology must deny itself in as such, break their crystallized forms, project themselves integrally in the "construction of destiny": self-criticism of ideology is, in this way, a project of a domain of *ideology realized* on the forms of development.

Weber, Scheler, Pareto, Mannheim: at the beginning of the 20th century the unmasking of the *idola* that obstruct the takeoff of a global rationalization of the productive universe and its domain social, is identified as the new historical task intellectual. The Wertfreiheit weberiana is the "manifesto" of the More radical rejection of any compromise between science and ideology. The scientific status has only one *doubt*, that of "self-control", which is "the only way to prevent deception, distinguish with precision the logical-comparative relationship of reality with ideal types in a logical sense, from the evaluation of reality according to ideals"[^1].

The fact that that Wertfreiheit has for Weber a meaning dramatic should not be ignored. The intellectual, preventing the judgment of value, accepts *virtually* one's own need to be: the acceptance is first of all recognition of the irrational that is in the system, the negative that is in it, and that, as inseparable from the positive, goes assumed as such. The problem - for Weber, for Keynes, for Schumpeter, for Mannheim - is in the instruments capable of operating *positive and negative combination* (capital and labour face), of do not allow a gap between the two terms, to *realize* the their complementarity. For all of them, the dominant theme is that of an future in which the entire present is projected, of a domain "rational" of the future, of an elimination of the *risk* that it involves.[^2]

This is why Mannheim is obliged to offer a mystified version of the functioning and reality of utopia.[^3]

Ideologues, for Mannheim, are nothing more than a "class of educated people". acting as freischwebende Intellektuallen, as "thinkers from justification": their craft tends to consolidation of the existing, to the socialization of development issues.[^4]

On the contrary, for "progressive thinking", "every single thing receives its last meaning only by some other thing that is in front of it or standing on top of it, by a *utopia of the future* or by a norm above the being, while the signification of the part is deduced in conservative thinking from something behind it, from the past or from what preexists at least in embryo".[^5]

Utopia is therefore nothing more than "structural vision of the totality". that is and becomes",[^6] transcendence of the pure "data", system of orientation aimed at "breaking the bonds of the existing order" for regain them at a higher and different level.[^7] For Weber and for Mannheim, the critique of ideology is one of the dynamic factors of the development. For both - as for Keynes - the only identifiable reality is the *dynamics of development*. The *utopia* of the Mannheim, beyond the affirmations of its author, is prefiguration of final models and global, in the sense of the given reality: the "critique of the thought conservative" therefore becomes a necessity, an instrument aimed at free the dynamic operation of the system. The constant breakage The balance will have to be overturned in a "scientific policy", anti-ideological, in a rational solution of conflicts generated by the the same development, but only after recognizing the inerence of those conflicts to the dialectical process of the real.[^8]

The contradiction still existing in Mannheim's thought - the utopia as a model fully immersed in the real dynamics of the processes political-economic, and its character of experimental anticipation projected into the future - is in the climate of all the intellectual work of avant-garde of the first '900.

But with Keynes and Weber the road is already marked. Utopia must "work" on the ground of programming, must abandon the ground of its general ideology: Mannheim expresses the consciousness of a gap still dangerous - the only real "danger" that threatens the process of perpetuation restructuring of the real - among the rationality of the project, its instruments of implementation, and social consciousness of the *need* of the development.

But also he works within the Weberian hypothesis of a work intellectual that drives away any negative utopia; under such light his criticism of ideology is consequent to the intent to make scientific political control over the dynamics of the system.

In this way, the Weberian *disenchantment*, its denial of the "value" as a yardstick of judgement, it really is - has it sharply observed Cacciari - as the ultimate consequence of the negative and "scandalous" Nietzschean statement of the Subject. "Weber takes away this 'scandal': the subject can now only be the subject-function, the *intellectual* precisely, or otherwise you have to do return to the 'old churches', the old illusions and mystifications of the 'god who speaks to us', of the 'god in me', in short: of substantiality of the Ego ...*Boiling every reductive process is, first of all, to make the Ego what is and must be in the irreversible context of its destiny'*".[^9]

If the subject is now the System, freedom from value is freedom from the *your* subjectivity. The relativity of the value must not be object of new "sacred sciences": the desacralization of activity intellectual is only the necessary premise for the operation correct of that activity, in the process of self-organization of *that* Subject. The *fall of the aura*, for Benjamin, expresses exactly this: integration of the subjective moment in the mechanism overall rationalization; but at the same time identification of an "ethic of rationalization", all aimed at itself. The processes of concentration of Capital, its own socializing, the constant rise of its organic composition, impose such ethics as a necessity. This is no longer presented as *external value*, is subtracted from the relativity of the invention ideological. The ethics of development will have to be realized *together* with the development itself, within the *internal* of its processes: the promise of *Release from the machine* must result from an imagination of the future carefully controlled.[^10]

All the *dissecrating* struggle of the European intellectual avant-garde in the first two decades of our century stands at the level of such a recognition of the new functions of intellectual work: the development, revealed as dynamic and dialectical, calls for a *plan*. against the constant danger of internal deflagration. It is in this sense that those avant-gardes, the more they demolish the old ones orderings and how much more they underline the consistency of the real as "realm of the absurd", are objectively overturned in anticipations ideological, in *part piano autopsies*.

The ideology is now *dated* once and for all in the form of a dialectic that *base on the negative*, that makes the contradiction the driving element of development, which recognizes the reality of the system *from the presence of contradiction*. Such a dialectics no longer has any need to continuously regress to ideology. Not constituting an abstract pattern of behavior, but defining, at the same time, the real fundamentals of the relationships of capitalist production and the strategy of the capital plan, it does reason for every utopian model and every possibility of development ideology itself. From the ideological point of view, every elaboration achieved in an institutional system of values is nothing more than a pure and simple "repeat". There is no possibility of "progress". of the system's self-consciousness from the system's point of view. The ideology can only retrace the steps already overcome for rediscovering, always and continuously, the highest form of itself in the form of *mediation*. At most, there may be progress "technical" in the disciplinary translations of ideology - but the story of the literary and artistic neo-avant-garde would have much to teach in this regard to the modern vestals of the disciplinary *commitment*. The true problem is to know to what extent this continuous reproduction ideology on itself still retains the essential roles from it covered during take-off and stabilization of the system bourgeois-capitalistic.

Even in its highest form, that which is concretized in utopia, ideology and developed capitalist system appear in contradiction. There is no longer any point, in that phase, simply *founding* the inerence of negation to the system: the problem that arises is all "technical", all aimed at the identification of the real, concrete, internal ways to the economic-productive base, which *making the "negativity "* - workers' negation - as a "necessity" intrinsic to the system process.[^11]

No longer Hegel but Keynes, not the ineffective ideology of the plan but the plan in the concreteness of its development, not the ideology of the New Deal but post-Keynesian criticism translated into countercyclical techniques: the ideology becomes concrete, it purifies every utopian trait, it falls directly in the individual areas of intervention. Which is like saying suppresses itself.

The bourgeois vocabulary on the "crisis of ideologies" conceals exactly such a reality: the complaint about the crisis is only an indication of an unhealthy nostalgia for tradition based on the ineffectiveness of the Kultur.

On the one hand, the Plan tends to identify itself with the institutions which support the existence, on the other hand, to pose itself as a specific institution itself. The dominion of the total capital is realized thus to the of outside of any logic extraneous to its own direct mechanisms, devoid of external justifications for the increasing realization of the instruments concrete intervention, in the most absolute independence from every abstract ethical" end, from every teleology, from every "having to be".

There is, however, a common element that binds together the anticipations intellectuals of the first decades of the 20th century. What Weber's theories, of Max Scheler or Mannheim's Max Scheler or Mannheim's Max Scheler in the structure of intellectual work, which Keynes and then Schumpeter lead back in the context of an economic plan that presupposes action articulated of the total capital, that the ideologies of the vanguard introduce as a proposal of social behavior, is definitely the transformation of the traditional ideology, practically defined, into utopia as a prefiguration of an abstract final moment of development, coinciding with a global rationalization, with an accomplished *realization of dialectics*.

This may not seem entirely accurate as far as a Weber or a Keynes. In fact, what is still in them of utopia is only a residual which acts to fully transform itself into a dynamic model once that the capital will have solved the problem of the creation of the new institutions capable of making their own internal contradictions work as propulsive elements of development. Not by chance, the models economic are now configured, now, *from the crisis* and not, abstractly, *contro* the crisis; nor the modern ideologies "of the contradiction" are extraneous to this process of positive realization of dialectics.

It results therefore, at the moment considered, an accentuation of the fractionation within the functional vision of intellectual work, as this falls into the sphere of productive work. Remains still completely open the problem of its placement in the cycles or in their programming: but it is certain that the intellectual work that has the courage to recognize and function as a capitalist science is separates objectively from the backward roles of the work purely ideological. From now on synthesis is impossible. Utopia itself marks, with its direction of travel, the next steps of the own extinction.

And it is a split that is destined to become more and more acute later on, as that between the institutions that realize the plan techniques and those that control its dynamics, a growing gap opens up.

These trends are all to be understood, in the concrete historical reality that follows to '17 and the Treaty of Versailles, in the profound contradiction that shakes European and American capitalism. It would be completely anti-historical let alone a capitalist consciousness all deployed and operating, in the sense of a project aimed at the creation of new institutions for an capital aware of the need to transform itself into social capital and to having to directly manage, as such, its own cycles, its own crisis, its own development.

But it would be false objectivity to emphasize the evident imbalances, the political backwardness, articulation and internal debate that characterize the '20s, like a blind rambling, broken only by some prophetic and brilliant prefigurations overall.

From the point of view of our analysis, it is however to be noted that precisely in that critical juncture, the role of intellectuals is to configure utopias mostly aimed to resize the same work cultural. In the field of intellectual work is to take party on one thing, mainly: on the theme of *politics* or not of that work itself, in the perspective of the avant-garde.

Let's try to compare between them two positions apparently irreconcilable. "We Futurists - writes Šklovskij in '26, defending the absolute autonomy of literature as 'verbal art', irreducible to reasons extraneous to its own construction[^12] - let's connect ours art with the Third International. But this, comrades, is a surrender to discretion! It is a Belinskij-Vengerov, is the *History of intelligencija Russian!*". Continuing then, in an even more explicit way, in taking position against "committed" art, agitation, propaganda, advocated by Majakovskij and the LEF: "I do not want to defend art in name of art, but propaganda in the name of propaganda ...The agitation carried out in a sung opera, in films, with exhibitions, is useless: it ends up devouring itself. In the name of agitation, take it away from art!"[^13]

In 1920 André Breton, in the Second surrealist manifesto, after having recognized that the thought "can do nothing but swing between the Awareness of its perfect autonomy and that of its rigorous dependence", plunges itself in this contradiction given for necessary and ineluctable, opting for a literature "unconditional and conditioned, utopian and realistic, which sees its purpose only in itself itself and wants nothing else but to serve"[^14].

Enzensberger has observed, with regard to the passage cited by Breton, that "the Surrealists elevated to their program the squaring of the circle".[^15] But that program is not specific to Surrealism: this has only made explicit the aspirations of the entire area of the intellectual vanguards who had chosen to take advantage of the terrain political to safeguard one last frontier on which to attest the defense of intellectual work in its institutional forms.

I am not a reactionary ideological project against an "advanced" one that is clash in the two statements of Šklovskij and Breton. Formalism and Surrealism agree, in essence, in their defense of the "professionalism" of intellectual work. Only the first, with greater lucidity and courage, manages to confess his character tautological, its own unattainability (until '26, at least), while the second chooses to elevate himself as an emblem of "bad conscience". intellectual.

But it is equally important to note that where Formalism - and with him the abstract avant-garde, in all areas of visual communication, and literary - is configured as a school of *work on language*, the Surrealism - and with him all the avant-garde "engaged" - ignores the Systematicity of intellectual work and tends to act as *intervention*. political tout-court.

In other words, we are facing two trends that will be perpetuated, until today, following two different and complementary directions:

1. on the one hand is the recognition by intellectual work, essentially as *work* precisely, not recoverable, therefore, to an revolutionary movement; the autonomy of such work is explicitly recognized as *relative*: it is only the political or economic client that can dictate a *sense* to the pure setup of a platform rational, assured by the internal criticism conducted on the disciplines;

2. on the other hand it is an intellectual work that denies itself as such, and stands as pure *ideology*; that wants to replace itself to the political organization, or celebrate it, or criticize it from within. Always, however, with the aim to *exit* from productive work, and to confront this as his *critical consciousness*.

The problem therefore arises of the mediation between these two attitudes: is the great theme of Benjamin, art and architecture. constructivist, social-democratic management techniques of the cities, urban utopias of Central European culture of the years ’30.[^16]

The ultimate meaning of such movements is only one. The vanguards intellectuals must now occupy the area from which they were held until then carefully far away: that of *work*. Not being as much as possible to maintain the institutional distance from productive work that had ensured in the past the *sacrality* of research intellectual, it remains only to voluntarily take a step that implies the destruction of one's classic roles. The benjaminian "fall of the aura" is not only induced by the generalization of the new modes of production, but it is also the result of a conscious choice, inside which has lowered all the will of survival contained in the hallucinated anti-institutional battle undertaken by thought negative.

Nor should we underestimate the *question* addressed to intellectuals by part of the most advanced Capital of the 20s and 30s. Rathenau and Ford explicitly make their demands. It is not claimed that the intellectual enters directly into the control of the cycles of production, but its contribution is expected to be clear and explicit "attribution of meaning" to the cycle itself. Entering the sphere of work, ideological production is simultaneously attracted and rejected. On the one hand, it is asked to produce global models: the rationalization of the cycles must not be separated from their socialization; innovative models must respond to needs that are simultaneously part of the moments of internal restructuring to the cycles and moments of circulation of the goods. On the other hand it is confined in the role of valorizing the constant capital: its intervention must directly affect the socialization of consumption. Delimiting the field of incidence of intellectual work at the moment "social", you just move to a different level the properties of the its traditional roles. Welcomed within the sphere of productive work - but not yet transformed into productive work itself - the intellectual processing is pushed to "functionalize" the ideological production, not to abandon it tout-court.

The anti-institutional moment of the avant-garde intelligencija has been revealed functional to the demolition of exhausted roles: all his demolition work now manifests itself as the setting up of a platform clear, from which to start again to discover the new "historical tasks" of the intellectual work.

Nor should it be underestimated that such historical tasks have simultaneously two interlocutors and two directions of travel: one first is the interview mystical with the capital, read as technological abstraction or as universal productive subject; a second one is the mystical conversation with the masses, read as an equally abstract subject of the circulation social production.

The ideology takes on the task of unifying subject and object of the production, to skip all moments of contradiction to present models of integrated operation of capital and labor, of ways and relationships of production: in other words - both that presents itself as an ideology that is all immersed in the working process that as an abstract project of socialization of work - in *utopia capitalistic-industrial*. At this point it is necessary to warn that all the analysis performed only marginally invests the point of view capitalist. The convergence of avant-gardes underlined above intellectuals and advanced capital is not an index of phenomena generalized: that same convergence, indeed, is revealed historically rather limited and temporary, and insistent on highly marginal development.

It is therefore important to grasp both the subjective character of the choices carried out by intellectual work, that the constant marginalization accomplished within the framework of capitalist development. Utopia becomes functional to the development as a reserve area of tendential models and as a weapon ideological for consensus extraction.

It is clear that these two directions enter into crisis whenever the trend models will ask for a real verification of their objectives and every time the same management of the consent will reveal itself as a weapon not very suitable for development purposes.

Between the aspiration to absolute autonomy and the volunteer self-cancellation in missions "at the service of the class", the ideology contemporary ended up choosing, in most cases and with a truly surprising constancy of behavior, to stabilize itself on the common thread of the two decision-making fields.

The autonomy of intellectual research responds to the perpetuation of the project for the recovery of Subjectivity, expropriated by the division capitalist labor. Intellectual work as "service of class" is a project of return - indirectly - of that same Subjectivity to the expropriated class. There is no need, we think, to emphasize the "misery" of these two ideological directions, of which we are discovering the objective complementarity. Literature and art as tools for the recovery of Totality, and as a transfer of this into the new historical subject by election - the working class - are part of a design that is objectively at the rearguard of development capitalist, even if in this it covers precise tasks.

What is more interesting, rather, is the way to achieve these two choices (or the compromise that the media).

The autonomy of formal construction, in all the historical avant-garde, no longer insists on the daily experience control project through the Shape. Now you are willing to accept that it is the experience that dominates the subject and founds it: the problem is, rather, to *plan the disappearance of the subject*, cancel the anguish that comes from the pathetic (or ridiculous) resist of the individual in front of the domain structures that tighten it from near, indicate as promised land of the universal peacemaking - heaven on earth is realized by the "disappearance of the tragic"[^17] - exactly the volunteer and tame submit to those domain structures.

Salvation is no longer in "revolt", but in surrender without discretion. Only a humanity that has introjected, made its own, absorbed, the ideology of work and development, which does not persist in the consider the production or the Plan as *other by itself* or as simple instruments, *that is recognized as part of an overall Plan*, and that as such you fully accept to *function* as a gear of a global machine, can redeem its "original fault". That does not is to have produced a system of means without knowing how to control the "revolt of objects" that is unleashed against the inventor - so Löwith and the young Lukács read Marxian alienation - but that is rather the "diabolical" insist of the "man" to remain such, to pose himself as "imperfect machine" in a productive universe that admits as coherent attitude the only and pure *silence*.[^18]

What is striking, in this ideology of unconditional consensus to the universe of capital, it is not so much its literariness as its rather its naive radicalism. There is no written in favor of *mechanisation of the universe* that will not leave you stunned if you compare those literary, artistic, cinematographic "posters" with the ends that they seem to propose. The invitation to *become a machine*, to the universal proletarization, to forced production, reveal too much explicitly the ideology of the Plan, in order not to arouse suspicion on the their real intentions.

The "negative thinking" had enunciated its own project of survival in the rejection of Hegelian dialectics, in the recovery of the individual contradictions from this eliminated. Positive thinking" does not he does something else, turning that negation symmetrically on himself. The negative is discovered as such, even in its "ineluctability". The renunciation in front of it is only the first condition that allows you to perpetuate intellectual disciplines, to recover (at the cost of having to destroy the same "aura" of intellectual work) tradition of its "sacred" extraneousness to the world, to repropose a reason, either albeit minimal, of survival.

The defeat of Reason is now assumed as the realization of the historical task of Reason itself: the cynicism of work intellectual exhibits himself, playing his cards to the limit ambiguous of self-irony.

Demonstrate without possibility of appeal that there is no other way that cancel the human subject in the Developmental Subject: this axiom tends to save ideology as the last cultural *project*. The "liberation from value", the disappearance of the Geist from the general process of rationalization, the neutralization of each project of justification *ethics* of the logic of the system, have already happened: they must now pose themselves with the force of the *date*, they can, at most, demonstrate their *efficiency*. That is why any residual "value" must be attacked with the violence of desecration. The fight against *man* is conditioned by the directions of development: only if the latter finds obstacles - due to the stickiness of the "prejudices" acting on a social level - during generalization of its domain, it will be able to propose again a mythology of the *human*. But yes will have to deal with a cynical and regressive mythology, functional only to to blow up resistances as weak as they are annoying.[^19]

A history of the modern world is still to be written from the point of view of worker view. We do not know, therefore, how much, in the changes of science of programming and in its political use, have concretely weighed the class struggles, negative experience, for the purpose of the enlarged reproduction, of the violent suppression of the unknown worker - of variable capital - in fascist countries, or the ambiguous results of the Soviet five-year plans.

It is certain, however, that the discovery - typical of the "advanced" sociology of the 50's - of the ineliminability of conflict, is the reason for every utopia based on the total and peaceful integration of the class in the processes of development. Against the optimistic thesis of a Talcott Parsons, punctually denied by the reality of workers' struggles, is the Recognition of the *universality* of the conflict: for Dahrendorf, not It is more a matter of foreshadowing the optimal forms of a development without tensions, but to realize the development *through* the tensions, through mechanisms to regulate conflicts, once isolated the latter within a single factory, power groups, of social stratifications, of individual institutions. Not without, however, the formulation of new utopias: first and foremost mobility social, as an axis around which to rotate those mechanisms of regulation and containment.[^20]

It remains firm, however, in the American and European theorists between '50 and '50. '60, that every possible *use* of the worker variable has as its own specific instrument the continuous restructuring of fixed assets and the organic composition of the capital. The scientific production enters *directly* into the extended accumulation processes, it is no longer *external* to them: it is a condition and a means of control. The processes of automation, the scientific forecasting techniques of the future, the experience of programming techniques and policies and the their radical renewal, they are at one with the liquidation of the theories of *balance*. Cycle and crisis reoccur indissolubly linked: intellectual production is cardinal of this functional connection. The classic working contrast abstract and concrete work begins to lose its functionality in a enlarged size. Which implies that the same traditional forms of extraction and consent management change radically. Now the consensus no longer concerns the disciplinary content, but the disciplines ideological in itself: put in crisis with regard to their function particular within the scientific forecasting techniques of the future, they reveal their real function as rearguard institutional system.

It is no longer important, in this respect, how they are articulation, quality or sense of their communications. Vale rather the mere fact that they exist, that there remains an army intellectual reserve completely ousted from any kind of production process, which takes on the task of reproducing, *as that sia*, the institutional forms of ideology. Indeed, one can already glimpse that the new task entrusted to this area of work intellectual - all aimed at the phase of preparation and "education general" of a generic workforce - let it not even be more the *education to consent*, but the *exercise to dissent*: provided that such dissent insists, precisely, on the experienced terrain of the ideological institutions.

The theme of "alternative content" of sciences and disciplines, or of the "alternative ways" of using them is, before even one slogans of a sector of organizations that are already starting to fail policies of the working class, a need of the avant-garde bangs of the capital.

Nor can it escape that "alternative culture", "operational criticism", or "critical teaching", are all links in a single chain. We are still within a reversed use of the critique of ideology: within a process of refinement of the instruments of intervention, of recomposition of traditional content, carried out in function of an affirmation of the *reality of development*.

All development is in itself radical self-surpassing, revolutionizing continuous *in itself*. Dialectics and tradition, reached levels development itself, must not only compensate each other, but unify totally. If in the reality of processes materials the *negative* - the "resistance" of the class - can not be absorbed, but only functionalized (not only Keynesian theories but also post Keynesian ones are explicit about it), at the level ideological the functionalization of the dissent is already feasible delimiting an area for the exercise of denial. For this purpose there is nothing more appropriate than to freeze the critical exercise within the disciplinary fields.

Neither is it said that this operation should be done by the capital. Extremely more functional for this purpose is the use of the forces of the radical or paramarxist "left", and in any case of the tradition that reduced Marxism to ideology. It is no coincidence that proliferate attempts at self-proposal in the last ten years in particular, of forms of "revolutionary cinema", of "the art of dispute", of "alternative urban management", of "sociology anti-institutional". It is all too easy to smile in the face of such pathetic intellectual illusions (or political opportunism, in the cases of worse): but there is no doubt that they highlight clamorously the *sale of ideology* which, at a particularly advanced stage of capitalist development, is carried out with a view to a readjustment disciplinary, and in function of a decisive revolution of the piano techniques.

When the rationalization is high at the time of the dynamic development of the overall capital, there is a need for a dynamic development of the different use of the disciplines that preside over the control, and to the elaboration of valorization and programming methods.

What is now presented as the subject of development is the globality of the Slowly. All the particular moments of it, useful at first to initiate partial control processes - from the analysis on the oligopolistic market structure, to the elaboration of theories anticyclical, to the techniques of intervention planned on the moment social distribution and consumption, up to the same techniques of rationalization of single productive sectors - must be of new sifted, criticized, placed in a new context.

What is at stake, from the capitalist point of view, is the global control of the scientific forecasting techniques of the future: the same concept dynamic of development requires such a methodological leap.

In this framework it becomes evident the growing importance attributed to the critical" moment. Nor is it more about the traditional functionalization of criticism, which has always been in bourgeois thought, has assumed the task of pushing elaborations and disciplines to to the highest level they are allowed. It is no longer a matter, in other words, of a simple "positive" use of criticism, of the immediate subjugation of criticism to remove the obstacles that development meets in its path. The disciplinary adaptation to directions of development, continuous, incessant renewal of disciplines and institutions, was until some time ago the task of a criticism itself elevated to a specific "discipline". Now it is necessary, to follow and anticipate the dynamic planning of the development, go from a criticism that is exercised *on* discipline and *on* particular techniques, to a criticism *of* disciplines.

It is not by chance that among the first instruments to be subjected to such new type of criticism both the *interdisciplinarity* technique (a technique even elevated to myth, during the debate on the techniques of programming during the 60s).

The interdisciplinary method presupposes the effectiveness of the individual fields of planned intervention - economic, sociological, territorial - modular through the temporary breakage of the exclusivity of the disciplines. It itself is the result of an initial *critique of the disciplines*: and exactly of a criticism that contested the claims totalizing the individual techniques of intervention. (It would be enough to think to the intense debate that took place in Italy and France around the ways of programming of the economic and formal planning of the territory, or to the U.S. radical sociology controversy against sectarianism of interventions at the urban level). To which it must be added that the sectorial programming - and just for the closed circle that in it comes to form between intervention technique and rebalancing purpose of the intervention itself - is obliged to act according to models *static*, following a centralized logic on the removal of the "imbalances.

Moving from the use of static models to the elaboration of dynamic models was the first step of the capitalist update in the use of piano techniques: to overcome this phase further, to to reach a full availability in the realization of a management overall of the planned development, is the objective that in this At the moment the science of the Plan is continuing.

From a simple "moment" of development, the Plan is imposing itself (we are imposed) as a new political institution.[^21] It is in this sense that the pure and simple interdisciplinary exchange - failed even at the practical - must be radically overcome.

Horst Rittel clearly explained the implications of the "theory of the decisions", once this is inserted in the self-programming of cybernetic systems (and it is logical that we give for granted that this level of rationalization still represents, in large part, a tendential model).

"The systems of values - writes Rittel[^22] - cannot be more considered stable for long periods. What you may want depends on what can be made possible, and what must be made possible depends on what you want. Utility purposes and functions are not independent sizes. They are in relationship of implication with the decision-making field. Value representations are controllable within wide limits. Faced with the uncertainty of alternative developments future it is absurd to want to build rigid decisional models, that provide strategies for long periods". Decision theory must ensure the flexibility of the "decision making systems": and it is clear that here is no longer at stake a criterion of comparable value with those of the sociological school of Frankfurt. The question to which a advanced level of programming must answer is: "what systems of values are generally consistent and guarantee the possibility of adaptation and therefore of survival"?[^23]

It is therefore the structure, necessarily "open", of the plane, which generates the own evaluation systems: nothing remains outside the plan. In front of it, all the hegelism of the "critical theories of the society" assumes the historical task of sanctioning, with the verification of the own objective impotence, the extinction of all opposition between "value" and plan.

The Weber-Scheler-Mannheim filming of the Weber-Scheler-Mannheim line from part of the American theorists of the "end of ideologies". If the Lippmann could still present the need for a de-ideologization of the political life as an element of anti-conflict stabilization, the Bell, the Lane or the Lipset bring their criticism back to the development theme.[^24] The primacy of a rationalization based exclusively on pragmatic bases, read by Bell in *New Deal*, or the identification made by Lipset of democracy with the "good society in action", recognize as real the attempt of eliminate any gap between utopia and development processes.[^25]

Habermas has recognized as the critique of the ideology "reduced in positivistic sense" has the task of revealing as dogmatic "every theory, which is referred to the practice in a different way from that of the enhancement and refinement of technical action radii".[^26] It is however indicative that immediately afterwards he does not read the functionality of this type of criticism to the development processes. "The preparation of the behavior rational through the critique of ideology recommends rationality as an excellent, if not exclusive, means to realize the values, because it guarantees 'efficiency' or 'economy' of proceeding. The two expressions reveal that the cognitive interest of the sciences empirical is a technical interest. They make it clear that the rationalization is from the beginning placed within the confines of the system of the social work, and it denotes in fact the being able to dispose on objective and objective processes. The determinations of this rationality, they cannot therefore be conceived as values, and they can only be justified internally of positivistic self-understanding as if they were values. A criticism of ideology, whose only purpose is the affirmation of rationality technique, it doesn't escape this dilemma: it wants rationality as a value, because it has, compared to other values, the advantage of be implicit in the same rational procedures".[^27]

All the criticism from Habermas and the last epigones of the school of Frankfurt, you are prevented from analyzing the issue of values from a a point of view that is independent of their "sociality". The criticism is exerts once again on the processes of rationalization because such, read in their meta-historical universality, and private, what most counts, of every connotation of class. The reduction of value to pure signal of himself, his disappearance within sectarianism of decision-making techniques, game theories as tools of control of antagonistic movements, of automation systems in the determination of the programs, are criticized by Habermas in the name of an *utopia of emancipation*, which brings the analysis back to the backward levels of a Marcuse.[^28] It is well true, moreover, that even in Popper piano and value are split but both are necessary. The rationality of the plan is not in question in itself: it is posed as pure *necessity*. The act of faith in rationality, instead, is presented as "decision", equally necessary, for the control of the behavior social in front of the plan.[^29] They are the communication processes that are to be scientifically enlightened: the purpose of this "formation" of political will is explicitly identified in the sociotechnical dissolution of the forms of the domain.

The theme of the "socialization of the plan" comes back to the fore as follows moment of reflection of the plane on itself: negation is transformed in constant control of the "positive".

An example of restructuring of intellectual work in roles differentiated, and reunification of disciplines in advanced techniques of programming, is the formation of "conversational languages", in use in dialogues between computing systems connected to each other by a network of lines of communication (), and in the dialogues between man and computer, allowed by the technological developments in the field of terminals, in the data transmission on telephone lines and in the design of multiple access systems ().[^30]

The exchange of direct messages between the manager and the machine is part of the framework of a research aimed at processing data not completely Formalizable: the dialogue allows in this case to take into account all of them the unforeseen variables that may occur during the course of the operation, and of the complexity itself of the problem posed to the computer. What interests us, in such operation, is the necessity of introduce "conversation models" based on codes that take into account of the *dialogue structure*: the simple formulation of "problem-oriented languages", stimulated in originates from the possibilities of using electronic calculators, and in genre of the programmable machines.[^31]

The quantification of forecasts, in the most advanced techniques of planning, therefore, does not disregard the subjective modifications and from internal variables to the given problem: condition of this is the control of the so-called "non numerical" calculation processes. The development of the "programming languages" therefore makes a decisive leap forward to the same language disciplines, transforming them from techniques analytical, in aid of the creation of a whole series of languages highly formalized.[^32] Describing some "languages of general purpose programming" - of languages, i.e. capable of process any type of data, "as well as to admit local definitions of new data structures" - Alfonso Caracciolo notes that this type of language "is ...particularly important because it constitutes a remarkable step towards the creation of powerful linguistic systems, of languages, i.e. with a local self-extension mechanism, and therefore much closer to our natural languages, which have a unlimited power of extension, but unfortunately not systematic and in truth often very ambiguous".[^33]

To the new branches of mathematics established for the study of systems dynamic - the theory of automata - therefore corresponds to a new technique to define and analyze those systems, through the so called *languages simulation*.

It does not interest us, evidently, to enter in the relative specific analysis to the artificial languages and programming: the hint made serves us to evaluate the level reached in programming techniques general, verifying what we have stated above about the destiny of traditional disciplines and the role of interdisciplinarity to the purposes of development quantification.[^34]

In the linguistic innovations listed there are in fact some common features:

1. they are governed by self-testing systems related only to the maximum enhancement of the piano techniques: they can therefore completely disregard issues of value;

2. they are largely independent from the specific characteristics of the systems to invest with the programming: all their effort is aimed at defining tools general plan;

3. they skip the interdisciplinary level, precisely by posing themselves as systems to work independently of the individual fields of application.

We can express this in another way: decision-making techniques, in appropriating the enormous potential contained in the calculator electronic, tend to create the specific *languages of the plan*, and, Consequently, the new general disciplines elaborated to *part from the floor*. Which also explains some of the phenomena that go along with such processes. There is no doubt that the enormous developments in linguistics modern have been stimulated by the new needs dictated by the techniques of communication with machines. Just as it is true that well soon there was a division of tasks. To the semantic analysis has reserved the investigation on what it is necessary to expel from the formalized programming languages: the *ambiguity* of the language "natural"; to the techniques of creation of artificial languages is reserved the only *innovation* task eligible at the level of the communication: the one, precisely, aimed at efficient instrumentation decision-making techniques.

The semantic analysis of the language, in turn, has stimulated the emergence of - or rather, the resurgence - of an ideology of the avant-garde artistic-literary. The claim, already of the avant-garde and then, in the 60s, of the neo-avant-garde, to pose as *work on the word*, as a critical experimentation of the articulation of language, goes therefore measured with the reality of the concrete and productive work on the new possibilities of programmed communication.[^35]

But it is not enough: the poetics of indeterminacy, of *open work*, of the ambiguity elevated to institution, insists in fact - in the great part of cases - exactly on the fields defined by the new techniques of man-machine communication: the case of ex machina music is only the most explicit example in this sense.

It is no longer the ideology that has taken on utopian connotations, indicates unexpected work lines to programming techniques. At work on communication materials - we are referring to all the techniques of visual, literary, musical communication, or to their contaminations - it is no longer up to the anticipation of the trend lines related to the development: the overcoming of the *final models*, in the forecasting technique, it extinguishes the utopian role of the new ideologies.

Here, too, a symptomatic process manifests itself. Expelled from development, the ideology turns against development itself: in the form of the challenge attempts, that is, its own extreme recovery. Not being able to pose as utopia - even if there are still many attempts to do so. sense: but their connotations, informed to the most total cynicism, can not deceiving no one - ideology overturns into nostalgic contemplation of their own outdated roles, or in self-dispute: and we know how, for modern ideology, from Baudelaire and Rimbaud onwards, self-contestation is a survival tool.

However, it remains fixed that every *external* processing road, for the intellectual work, remains precluded. The only illusion of work *outside* can be given by the revolt against intellectual work himself, expressed by the *sacralization of his impotence*: exactly what so much recent artistic production does unconsciously. Beyond that is the backward jump, it is the "courage to talk about roses", the shipwreck in the "happy time" of the Bourgeois Kultur: ideology as "" uselessness. But it is no coincidence that the historical fate of formalisms is always concluded in the use "advertising" of the *work on form*.

We are therefore facing an extremely significant phenomenon. The rationalization no longer uses languages that *speak* of the development - this is a task still performed, of course, but only with marginal functions - but tends to dominate the development language. Creating codes already all *inside* the technological structures of the programming, you eliminate any possibility to justify "ethically", with *external* languages, the programming itself. The creation of formalized programming languages drops the utopia of a control of the *fines* of the rationalization plan by means of communication tools that assume the characteristics and connotations. The project of development control through a intellectual work aimed at providing it with teleology - the project of a Benjamin, in essence - is rejected in the limbo of utopia, unusable by the continuous process of marginalization of the "meaning" that those programming languages pursue.

All this is only a sign of the extension of the capitalist domain total on the universe invested by the plan: also, therefore, on the universe of "social" communication.

The formal use of the language of development has a meaning particular when this is projected on the city. Modern urban planning - as a utopian attempt to safeguard a *shape* for the city, or rather a principle of form lowered in the dynamism of urban structures - it has not been able to realize its own structural models. But within urban structures and territorial all the contribution of the historical avant-garde lives with a its particular poignancy: the city as an advertising structure and self-publicizing, as a set of communication channels, becomes a kind of machine, certainly not working as a production machine, but certainly active as issuer of incessant coded messages *in the form* of programming languages. (The indeterminate is given in its specific form, offers itself as the only possible determination for the urban whole: think of the vast theorizing, in the '60s, on the theme of the territory as "magnetic field").[^36]

In this way the attempt to make the language live takes shape of development: to make it concretely experientable in life daily.

Although here you can only make some hints, it goes noted that the creation of the language of the plan was accompanied by constantly a parallel theorization, whose unitary line is traceable from the general science of signs - semiotics of Peirce - up to the most recent elaborations of *aesthetics technological*.

The appeal is anything but academic. The research of the areas of relevance of grammar, logic and semiotics is allowed from the contributions of Wittgenstein, Carnap and Frege; pragmatism methodological Peirce comes to indicate the conditions of manipulability of the pure sign, completely devoid of any implication designation, of each semantic reference. An exact theory of signs becomes necessary when you discover the need for schemes of indien communication, teeth from subjective interpretations. The entrance of the theory of information in the evaluation of quantum quanta of information contained in structured sets of signs, part yes - in Bense, for example °\* -, by the need to consider communication aesthetics as having a meaning that completely coincides with the physical reality of a work, but it can be traced back without possibility of misunderstanding to a mathematically describable logic. The "constructiveness" of aesthetic communication is reducible, in this sense, to a series of choices alternatives, of the site corresponding to the operation of the computers 2 38 ro numerical two 2 38 ro

studies directed by Norbert Wiener around servomechanism projects applicable to units of war, are of 1943: from those studies, as it is known, it started processing no; automatic mechanical ones, based on a general theory and self-governing systems. It is extremely significant, therefore that the application of the principle of entropy, or of the irreversibility of communication - fundamental to ensure effectiveness and logical consistency of procedure to self-governing systems = has been anticipated, in the years between '20 and '30, in the analysis linguistics: the theory of information is already all present in the determination of formal meanings made by the Russian "°.

È ? LE of Bense - in the electronic music of a Stockhausen or of a Xenakis, in "programmed art", in some poetry experiments phonetics -, the relationship ideology, programming science is punctually verte verte to general theory of signs enters of weight in aesthetics and formal research: the absolute coincidence of the sign with itself, the absolute disappearance from it of any "meaning". external, the objectivity of the artistic phenomenon, no more project but pure objective fact, evaluable with binary systems, they are not only one hypostasis of cybernetics, but also the last attempt of emancipation from it.

The more mathematic reading of the systems of artistic communication tends to recover the traditional functions of art. Acceptance disenchanted with the total technicalization of aesthetic processes is to foundation of an exasperation of the autonomy of those processes from the real \*°, the programming language abstracts from itself, it becomes occasion of semantic slippage, is posed as formalization to the square "!. For those who have not noticed it, we warn that the analysis of the technological aesthetics fully demonstrates the above we have affirmed on the marginal function of ideology within the of the universe of the plan.

Putting itself under the sign of the theory of information, the art technology discovers abandonment as the only chance of survival. of every utopia, of every tendency towards a "project": it reveals itself as pure signs, desert of meaning, programmed reproduction of semantic voids,

Despite everything, this is also an ideological project: tidotto al minimum, of course, but nevertheless evaluable only as such. The objectuality of art - that with Benjamin and the avant-gardes constructivist was the foundation of the last bourgeois positive utopia - is now revealed as a mere pretext to continue to be anyway: even if this means that this being coincides with the continuous speaking of its own extinction to represent it, to make it present "\*.

Our thesis is confirmed. The ideology is reproduced on if same. Its celebration of the plan and its technical forms, is concealed under a pathetic reaffirmation of autonomy, which deceives no one: the reasons for its survival are related to the stickiness of the ideological institutions, not their actual functionality.

Once these processes have been ascertained, it must be explained the persistence and the continuous reproduction of a purely ideological intellectual work, attested to the objectively more backward levels of development capitalist: the more backward that work is, the more backward it is. ideological presents itself as an alternative use of the disciplines in function anticapitalist.

Having already mentioned it, we can put aside the most obvious aspect of this attitude, that is to say, the one addressed to an internal criticism of the disciplines, aimed at repositioning them in the global processes of development. i |

It is no coincidence, however, that the reaffirmation of the ideology and the "recovery of value" related to intellectual work, always pass more through the appropriation of single Marxian elaborations, separated from the concrete context of the criticism of political economy and criticism of philosophy. The recovery of the "young Marx represents the privileged moment of the overthrow of ideology in "science", indeed, in the general theory of epistemology. | i

We could talk, by the way, about a cunning of ideology. Denying oneself as "reality", contesting its validity as a form of knowledge, it can always recover as the ultimate product of a "purification". progressive and radical. "An ideology - writes Althusser \*°° - is an system (which has its own logic and rigor) of representations (images, myths, ideas or concepts, as appropriate) with an existence and a historical function within a given date company. Without entering into the problem of the relationships that a science has with the its (ideological) past, let's say that ideology as a system of representations is distinguished from science by the fact that in it the practical-social function prevails over the theoretical function (or function of knowledge)".

So that the Cow can conclude criticizing the confluence, in Althusser, of theoretical demystification of the ideology of socialist humanism, and of permanence of bourgeois ideology, reduced to an instrument of intervention practical-political "\*,

But it does not seem to us that here is the central node of the new mystifications on the positive role of the critique of ideology. The root of the problem is all in the affirmation of the "unreality" of ideologies. The difference between unreality and ineffectiveness is in fact subtle. Prioritizing the first interpretation is almost inevitable to reach directly to conclude with the availability of ideology: and yes it's about - mind you - a much greater availability the more radical and profound was the scientific "critique" of ideology itself, which "returns" it to the world transformed into positive theory.

The "critique" is - and not only, of course, in Althusser, that we have mentioned only as a pathological case of the generalized recovery of a job intellectual as a universally "necessary" moment - presents itself therefore completely overturned with respect to its specific purposes attributed in the German Ideology or the Misery of Philosophy. The which is, of course, not as serious on a purely theoretical level as it is as an indication of a political trend.

On the one hand, the devaluation, the depreciation, the marginalisation of the ideologies in the classic sense of the term. On the other hand their re-introduction, their recovery, their re-functionalization as implicit moment in the concrete disciplines: as far as the more we their functionalization as an implicit nucleus (not revealed as such, therefore, all translated into intervention technique) to the disciplines of the Plan. The "criticism" is presented in this process in its two completely complementary faces: a first time as revelation of the misery of ideology, a second time as magic reagent that solves purified residues in plan techniques intellectual work.

We are exactly within that meaning of criticism ideological that the latest epigones of the sociological school of Frankfurt propose with insistence.

Although not entirely confessed, the ideological deformations that determine the political choices of most organizations of the workers' movement - and even substantial bangs of the opposition extra-parliamentary - are nothing more than the development of the utopias of the Linkskomunismus or "sociological left". We are constantly faced with a phenomenon to be faced: capital expels the ideology as a "danger" for the efficiency of its own processes of rationalization, while organizations and the class" intellectuals take possession of that sold out tool.

The "mission" of the bourgeois intellectual is summarized as follows just by the "class intellectual". The Marxism of the young Lukdécs, in his recovery of a Hegelian reading of Marx, is anything but a isolated case: it defines a constant mode of action, the more serious it is how much more it has managed to penetrate into the official policies of the worker parties. Intellectual work as a "project" of "humanism socialist", the struggle mediated by subjective emancipation, the identification of socialism and global development plan, promoted and socially controlled, the reproduction of the ideology of the work, the tendential reconquest - mediated by the intellectuals - of the human totality, the project, finally, of alternative sciences and techniques (or the alternative use of science and techniques): not a few of the ideological tools put in place as legitimation of the lines of development of "socialism in one country", are today operating within the to the organized labor movement '°. The ideologization of Marxism is therefore presents, from the capitalist point of view, as a tool for to make the other party manage the solution of the backlog of problems of the development: in this sense it is objectively one of the means superstructural "realization of the dialectic", of functionalization of your negative.

From the point of view of intellectual work, it has a meaning specific: it allows the perpetuation of "historical" tasks of which the Capitalist rationalization has expropriated the intellectual himself. All the reactionary nature of socialist humanism as a "project" of social realization of the "value", it is discovered when you trace back that project to the thesis that wants in the Marxist alternative the overturning immediate of the trend lines of the capital, implemented on the basis of the maximum levels of bourgeois processing.

Two typical utopias are therefore made to coincide: it is not by chance that the Redemption of utopia takes shape in the propositions of the "alternative positive".

There would be no need to discuss such predictable issues so easily demystifying, if they did not act concretely as instruments of deviation of the class struggle, and if they did not constitute levels of ideological claim on which the many bangs are at risk of being attested to intellectual work still functional to the moments of socialization of the plan. What should be noted, however, is that the project of "emancipation" through the revolutionisation of science and the technical, insists (and just as a project) on the specific area of bourgeois utopia. The rejection of disenchantment about the possibilities of utopia, thus translates into the ideology of the participation of the class to development, as its "ideological engine": and after all for jumping at even feet the obstacle of the objective extraneousness of the jabs class interests in development, there is no other tool than the ideological penetration.

Utopia and plan are again disjointed: at the second goes all the operation, to the first one is reserved a role that we could define "rhetorical". The calculated design of the development no longer needs generate its own ideologies and legitimations. These, as criteria of value, are impediments to the following to the essentiality of decision-making techniques: as it remains in them a marginal utility, they should be handed over to the internal opposition to the system, leaving you with the illusion that you have ripped weapons already in the hand to the opponent.

Naturally, it is not the tactical aspect of this process that arouses concerns. What needs to be made clear, and once and for all, is the objective nature of this selling off of ideology as a moment structural in the elaboration of the dynamic models that allow the macroeconomic and macrosocial planning. That is, it will be necessary to recognize that the appropriation of ideologies by organizations of class is not so much the result of recognizing oneself as a "function developmental "critique" - the utopian "risk", in fact, is always more integrated in the same elaboration of the dynamic models that mediate the overall capitalist domain - but it is rather the consequence of of the recovery of an ideological-institutional baggage that tends to paralyze class movements.

With respect to the structure of intellectual work, it should be noted that that recovery represents the last anchor of salvation for the defense of privileges in the process of extinction. Overturn all utopian charge, all the "designing" will, all the ethical contents of the dutiful being bourgeois, in the socialist hypothesis, means in essence to safeguard the institutional roles of the intellectual; indeed, the roles more extraneous to the processes of homogenization of the class: since it is, always, of an intellectual statute careful to resume its own distances from productive work, whenever this is allowed by the circumstances.

There are therefore new tasks for a Marxian critique of ideology. Less and less, in fact, such a criticism appears functional to an attack directed against the instruments of capitalist organization: the new levels reached by the overall plan, and even more so the lines of trend along which the dynamics of development are moving, do appear a similar political task as a battle carried out on areas backward, or at least on areas that are expected to shrink more and more. Aside from the role that the critique of ideology can play in the historicalize the present situation, it is now clear that his most proper point of application is the fundamental node that marks the passage of bourgeois ideology into the socialist "project".

Reducing all Marxism to utopia, using it as an instrument of anticipations (and, often and willingly, of anticipations that insist on even on individual disciplinary areas), mediating its revolutionary nature with a sociological use or humanitarian ideologies: these have been, by time - from the misunderstandings caused by the last Engels, even - i steps that have neutralized the formation of an organization appropriate of the class. Nor is it a coincidence that among the power supplies of such mythologies, punctually transformed into political praxis, always be intellectuals who seek in socialism roles denied them from the capitalist otganization of development \*".

The attack that must be launched against such mythologies must unite indissolubly to the analysis of the objective roles, all internal to the capitalist plan, from which it is necessary to start to overturn in practice policy the same objective conditions that the development imposes, and to which is not given to escape that mystifying the function of the same work intellectual.

It is easily conceivable - also because it is already directly verifiable - that the processes induced by the expansion of the capitalist domain on the global development, will simplify and reduce the hierarchy of roles related to intellectual work, separating clearly, from the structure homogenization of the control and management functions of the single phases or individual areas of development, the roles related to the analysis, and to the processing, and leaving a minimum reserve of necessary ideological contemplation.

To the band directly connected with the decision-making area political-economic, is opposed to a system of mass controls: a process far from unknown in the history of the organization. capitalist production, but that surely is presenting Quantitatively new aspects.

Tl "Pirelli document" and "Project 80" agree perfectly in the outline as a perspective the enlargement of the processes of sectorial diversification and a "dynamism in the articulation of the corporate structures and entities", such as to be at the country level, like the United States, which has already reached the "threshold". of planned and permanent innovation". But the hypothesis of a capital extremely concentrated and with a very high organic composition is still an odello ". The trend lines currently detectable indicate that next to and within the perspective of a perpetual and programmed cycle dynamic situation, in Italy and in Europe is implementing a general restructuring of the division of labor that sees to the first given the strengthening of the sector traditionally known as the tertiary sector

Interchangeability, versatility, interview preparation interdisciplinary: these are the new features that are required to a generic intellectual labor force, whose process of massification already takes place at the time of its preparation. A series of extremely revealing analysis have already identified the drawing political-economic that underlies the constant growth of the services and administrative and productive control \*°.

It is not necessary - indeed it would be incorrect - to carry the analysis on the homogenization of abstract work in the factory in the analysis of the new roles of intellectual work. The qualification generic of the directly productive workforce and its functionality to the rapid change of cycles or to the need for a worker mobility used as a control and artificial tool re-subdivision, responds to the needs and processes of the capitalist party still largely independent of those who invest the restructuring of workforce preparation methods intellectual. (If ever, the fact that there is a common side to such two sides of the production process is an element to be reacted to politically, after having precipitated it).

In the meantime it is necessary to keep well firm an objective data on which is extremely dangerous to misunderstand: the process that today invests, and not only in Italy, the school as a whole, should not be read as directed to a generic "deskilling" of intellectual work. On the contrary, it is a precise requalification, even if it looks like expropriation of positions of social privilege - real or mystified - in the various sectors in which intellectual work is carried out.

That it is licit to speak of new qualification is demonstrated by a reading that does not start from the subjective point of view of the intellectuals, but by the needs dictated by development. The genericity of the preparation basic intellectual responds in fact to a series of objectives all functional to the restructuring of the organic composition of the capital "°.

'However, talk about proletarization of intellectual work tout-court, skipping all the real mediations through which you organize the new class movement control functions, and incorrectly anticipating results of processes that are far from defined or linear, can be mystifying. It is more accurate to recognize that, in each case, we are in the presence of a constant increase of extraneousness of the intellectual to the contents of his work, which is realized all the more deeply the latter is characterized by exactly like "work": more exactly, indeed, as a paid job. Which does not take away that already today, in highly automated sectors, such as that of electronics, there are already examples of an intellectual work directly productive. One can extrapolate from this a trend general, and consequently anticipate the need for a transfer of mass of roles aimed at the valorization of fixed capital to roles directly productive: with the warning, however, that the constant increase of the factory tertiary follows a process that tends to make operate the entire company as a machine of enhancement of the capital.

Read in the current conditions of intellectual work a concrete tendency towards a material homogenization, which passes through the capitalist social and productive restructuring processes, means recognizing in the massification and mobility of roles, in the loss of traditional privileges reserved for work intellectual, in the detachment - which already happens in the preparation phase school and university - from the contents of their work, in the extraneousness that finally also the intellectual is obliged to experiment with the capitalist organization of labor, some of the positive conditions from which to start again, in order to elaborate an program to attack the overall plane.

The use of science as an internal factor in the production cycle, the use of the directly productive of scientific research, at the limit, yes impose on capital today both as tools necessary to the dynamics of the cycle, which as tools for class re-subdivision and control of his movements. But at the same time, such use of work intellectual - the only one we are interested in at this time for the purposes of politicians - carries out the vast and continuous operation of expropriation conducted by the capital, in its reduction under its sign what was opposed, at the origin, as concrete work place of Facing the abstract worker work: science is now all objectified inside the development.

We do not believe in the repeated inventions of new class allies worker. But it would be suicidal not to recognize that they are the same lines of capitalist development to recompose, for its own purposes, a tendentially homogeneous work force, which you can make work under the sign of the direct interests of the working class. Overturn what has been, for too long, the capitalist design, the one that sees as its own end a working class organized by the capital: This is the goal to be achieved by setting as task the management worker of the subjective claims of the new layers of work intellectual wage-earner.

But this is not possible without beating every reactionary illusion, every reactionary illusion, every proposal aimed at restoring professional dignity to those intellectuals "degraded". Show concretely the reactionary nature of every speech that wants to offer "alternative" perspectives to intellectual work, therefore means to recognize that only within the objective role imposed by the development domain is the condition to use the struggle of the intellectual classes absorbed directly into the production, in an overall attack on the capital plan: which means, essentially, extend the political use of the wage struggle to increasingly wider social strata.

The intermediate objective, the reversal of the entire cost of the capitalist restructuring on the capital itself, leads back to the theme general class organization, several times addressed by this magazine.

And that's why the only objective to which the critics should be directed of the ideology or critique of the plan, is nothing more than a new form of class organization, able to beat, no more utopias, without any "alternative model" immediately experimentable, without subjective anticipations, the concrete reality of the reorganization programmed capital.
